Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
Alicante Journal of English Studies / Revista Alicantina de Estudios Ingleses
ISSN: 0214-4808 | e-ISSN: 2171-861X
Issue No. 38, 2023, pages 43-57
https://doi.org/10.14198/raei.2023.38.03
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney:  
Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Costanza Mondo
Author:
Costanza Mondo
University of Turin, Italy
costanza.mondo@edu.unito.it
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2236-4580
Date of reception: 05/07/2022
Date of acceptance: 12/12/2022
Citation:
Mondo, Costanza. 2023. “A Bird’s-Eye View over 
Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind 
Adiga.” Alicante Journal of English Studies 38: 
43-57.
https://doi.org/10.14198/raei.2023.38.03
© 2023 Costanza Mondo
Licence: This work is licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License 
(CC BY 4.0).
Abstract:
The creative and meaningful use of animal imagery 
plays an important role in Aravind Adiga’s novels. In his 
previous works, such as the 2008 Booker-prize-winning 
The White Tiger and Last Man in Tower (published in 2011), 
animal references frequently feature in the narration, thus 
conveying multi-layered meanings. However, animal 
references become particularly noticeable in Amnesty, his 
latest novel published in 2020. The aim of this paper is 
to investigate the use of animal imagery in Amnesty and 
unravel some of its possible meanings. Starting from 
interpretations of animal metaphors related to humans, 
the paper will then put under scrutiny other interpretations 
of animal references which progressively enlarge their 
reach, thereby involving not only the city of Sydney, but 
the whole novel. By making reference to specific passages, 
I will explore the meanings of the animal imagery with 
respect to the illegal immigrants, their condition and to 
isolation, which acquires particular relevance, since the 
narrator is a Sri Lankan illegal immigrant who initially 
reached Australia thanks to a student visa. Furthermore, 
other interpretations of the animal references could revolve 
around the city of Sydney, its curious representation as a 
jungle and its representational use of animal imagery in 
the coat of arms and official contexts. Finally, light will be 
shed on the interesting role played by animals in pivotal 
scenes and their unexpected powerful revelations, which 
allow readers to better understand some episodes in the 
novel and interpret them from a different, enlightening 
perspective.
Keywords: Aravind Adiga; animal imagery; Australia; 
immigrants
Costanza Mondo
44
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
1. Introduction
While reading Aravind Adiga’s thought-provoking novels, one is struck by the 
surprizing abundance and elaborate meaningfulness of animal references scattered 
through their plots. In the 2008 Booker-prize-winning The White Tiger, Balram—
the main character and narrator—informs the reader about the rapacious behaviour 
of the four landlords who profit from different resources in his native village—the 
Stork, the Raven, the Buffalo and the Wild Boar—who “did not need to come out 
into the village except to feed” (Adiga 2009, 25). As Khor underlines, the animal-
landlords could also embody primitive forms of capitalism, aside from the specific 
resources they control (2012, 56). As far as the reference to the tiger of the title 
is concerned, it does not merely allude to the nickname given to young Balram—
the future callous murderer of his own employer who is sacrificed on the road to 
self-realization—but it also hints at India’s rise as a tiger economy (Mendes 2010, 
276). Aside from symbology, though, a real fur-and-blood white tiger features in 
the narration. In a pivotal scene, Balram finally comes face-to-face with a white 
tiger which walks to and fro in its cage at the zoo.
Almost archetypical in its exemplarity, the awe-inspiring image of the tiger 
already sparked William Blake’s imagination, who portrayed the flaming predator 
as striped with a “fearful symmetry” (2017, 78). Nevertheless, the white tiger is 
more redolent of Ted Hughes’s superb jaguar. After listing a series of uninspiring 
and far-from-sublime animals, Hughes writes: “But who runs like the rest past 
these arrives/ At a cage where the crowd stands, stares, mesmerized,/ As a child 
at a dream, at a dream, at a jaguar hurrying enraged/ Through prison darkness 
after the drills of his eyes (Hughes 1957).” In a similar vein, Balram is charmed 
by the fierce beauty of the white tiger and its mesmerising power: “Black stripes 
and sunlit white fur flashed through the slits in the dark bamboo; it was like 
watching the slowed-down reels of an old black-and-white film. He was walking 
in the same line, again and again […]. He was hypnotizing himself by walking 
like this – that was the only way he could tolerate this cage” (Adiga 2009, 276). 
In his interesting paper on the animal imagery in Ted Hughes’s poems, Piciucco 
states that the power of the energy-seething jaguar “is not only a means of 
capturing the zoo visitors’ attention but it is the living force enabling the animal 
to remain deaf in front of its state of imprisonment” (2016, 195-196). The 
white tiger has a similar power which hypnotizes the feline itself, in addition to 
the viewers. The sight of the fierce tiger triggers a violent emotional reaction in 
Balram, who loses his senses and then takes the resolution to slit his master’s 
throat in order to tread the path to entrepreneurship. In Walther’s opinion, 
the encounter between the tiger’s and Balram’s gazes unleashes the previously-
45
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
obedient servant’s transformation into a figure of contemporary capitalist power 
and acts as an eye-opener on his own identity (2014, 589).
Last Man in Tower is another meaningful novel in which animal references 
loom large. In a sense reminiscent of The Visit of the Old Lady by Dürrenmatt and 
The Devil and Miss Prym by Coelho, the novel is centred on the generous offer 
made by Mr Shah, an ambitious builder, to the residents of a flat in Mumbai: 
he will bestow upon each of them a large sum of money, provided that they all 
abandon their apartments. Mr Shah depicts the residents of Vishram Society as 
“social animals” (Adiga 2011, 63) and unflinchingly witnesses the gory sight 
of two hawks fighting over a mouse outside the window, which may act as a 
sort of mirror for Shah’s rapacious and predatory nature: “The dead mouse, 
left behind on the sill, was oozing blood and grease. Shah’s mouth filled with 
saliva” (Adiga 2011, 51). Eventually, only one resident—called Masterji—firmly 
keeps refusing the offer, thereby stoking the throbbing hatred of his previously-
friendly neighbours. While Masterji is not even considered a human being 
by the residents anymore (Adiga 2011, 274), other characters take on animal 
characteristics, such as Ajwani, a seemingly ruthless man, who has “gill-like 
lines” (Adiga 2011, 179) on his cheeks. In the end, the residents of Vishram 
Society slowly but progressively degenerate and become even worse than the 
most deadly and unpleasant creatures. As Masterji desperately wonders: “Pigeon, 
crow, hummingbird; spider, scorpion, silverfish, termite and red ant; bats, bees, 
stinging wasps, clouds of anopheles mosquitoes. Come, all of you: and protect me from 
human beings” (Adiga 2011, 345; italics in the original).
In terms of abundance of animal imagery, Adiga’s latest novel, entitled 
Amnesty, is no exception. Danny, the main character, comes across innumerable 
animals such as rats, a white cat, a huntsman spider, a goat, grasshoppers, a 
pitbull terrier and two pugs. Yet, it must be recognized that the birds take the 
lion’s (or rather the hawk’s) share. Indeed, the plot is finely interwoven with 
countless references to birds perched in the streets of Sydney or recalled by 
Danny, such as a colourful lorikeet, white cockatoos, black cockatoos, a crow, 
jabirus, mynahs, a white egret, cormorants, eagles, pelicans, pigeons, a magpie, 
seagulls and other unspecified birds. Even Danny’s sayings hinge upon winged 
beings: “the kingfisher shows off, and the eagle hovers all day over water, but the 
crow is the one who always gets the fish” (Adiga 2021, 89). In The White Tiger, 
references to tigers and animals are imbued with several layers of interpretation 
which do not reduce them to a single coherent tropology, while the image of the 
tiger becomes a key symbol (Anjaria 2015, 119), as evidenced by the very title of 
the novel. In light of the recurring animals in the Indian author’s literary works 
and of their connection to multi-faceted interpretations, I would like to analyse 
some possible meanings of the animal imagery in Amnesty. Several possible 
Costanza Mondo
46
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
interpretations will be put forward and analysed for their meaningfulness and 
implications. After having brought to the foreground interpretations related to 
human beings, the paper will put forward interpretations of animal references 
involving the city of Sydney and parts of the novel itself.
This analysis attempts to situate itself in the body of work that deals with 
Adiga’s novels in order to understand the characteristics of his works, analyse 
the ways he tackles topics and unveil the meanings of recurring themes in his 
literary production, of which animal references are a powerful example. While 
several scholarly papers have engaged with The White Tiger—some of them were 
cited before—, Amnesty does not seem to have been a focus of scholarly research. 
Therefore, it is hoped that the present analysis on animal references in Amnesty 
and their multi-layered meanings might spur other scholars to engage with 
Adiga’s works so as to examine whether animal metaphors are tackled differently 
or are linked to other social themes.
2. The Illegal Immigrant as a Chased Animal
One of the most interesting meanings of the varied animal imagery in Adiga’s 
novel is the depiction of illegal immigrants as chased animals. This association is 
reminiscent of Balram’s animalization, which derives from his subaltern position 
(Walther 2014, 580) and the stifling and ironic image of the rooster coop, whereby 
the poor and destitute are equated with passive poultry, whereas the rich wear the 
uniform of the butcher who crams roosters into a cage (Khor 2012, 47). In her 
ecocritical analysis of Ortese’s L’ Iguana, Iovino stresses the dehumanization of 
those ruthlessly oppressed and marginalized in the eyes of their oppressors (2020, 
86). Yet, in Amnesty, Adiga further emphasizes the equation of oppressed groups 
of people with animals from the beginning of the novel: “‘I asked,’ […] ‘what are 
you?’” (Adiga 2021, 3; italics in the original). Although she is merely joking, the 
Australian passerby unwittingly marks out Danny’s status not only as an outsider, 
but also as an animal or object, all indistinctly mingled in the pronoun ‘what.’ That 
Danny is rather seen as a fugitive animal, though, is evidenced by some revealing 
expressions, such as “the leash tugged again at him” (Adiga 2021, 209) or “Who’s 
after me? They all are” (Adiga 2021, 183). This statement is far from hyperbolic, 
since Australian immigration policy allows every citizen to report potential illegal 
immigrants, thereby creating an Australian example of “hostile environment,” a 
phrase employed by Theresa May in 2012 (Hill 2017). There is even a telephone 
number of which those citizens who want to report potential illegal immigrants can 
avail themselves. With respect to this, the novel presents a scene which resonates 
with Fanonian references. On a train, Danny’s cover as a blond-streaked Australian 
is blown by the attentive gaze of a baby: “The woman in a white shirt and jeans 
47
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
was reading a newspaper, but her blond child, his head on his mother’s thighs, like 
a cat on a lap, was looking at Danny. […] his eyes began sparkling. The highlights 
don’t fool me, mate. I know what you are” (Adiga 2021, 38).
Paradoxically, though, the novel goes one step further and implies that 
illegals are inferior to animals. When Danny decides to remain in Sydney after 
his student visa expiration date, which immediately turns him into an illegal, 
his callous ‘landlord’ forces him to clean dog poo in front of his shop several 
times. Danny’s changed condition and the silent exploitation he is going to be 
subjected to are therefore strongly highlighted by this event. Similarly, Abe—
another illegal and Danny’s friend—is run after by a stray, confused pitbull. The 
dog is eventually collected by a police officer who is concerned about its safety, 
while absolutely unaware that Abe and other immigrants are toiling in an orchard 
nearby, picking cherries: “Abe recognized the look in his [the police officer’s] 
eyes: the look of a people losing their grip on a continent” (Adiga 2021, 224).
Interestingly, though, Danny and the illegal immigrants are not the only people 
to be associated with animal imagery, which ripples over Radha and Prakash as 
well. Defined as ‘Oscar and Lucinda,’ thereby evoking “the historical novel of 
colonial Australia” (Bertinetti 2010, 325-326; italics in the original) by Carey in 
a very tongue-in-cheek manner, the two compulsive gamblers are intertwined 
with ornithic references. They are “lovebirds” (Adiga 2021, 116) and “migrate” 
(Adiga 2021, 93) from one pub to another on the lookout for bets to place and 
garish slot-machines. While Radha’s mind processes the unexpected information 
that Danny is illegally living in Sydney, she looks at him from a new perspective: 
“like a parrot going upside down with an odd fruit” (Adiga 2021, 166). Although 
Prakash has “feathery” (Adiga 2021, 139) black brows, he is rather compared to 
a dangerous, unpredictable animal. Readers are told that “This is just an animal 
inside him. An instinct is sitting here, not a man” (Adiga 2021, 141) and Radha 
herself indirectly compares him to a caged animal by telling him: “‘Prakash, […] a 
man in prison has a choice: either break out or make his cell as big as the world’” 
(Adiga 2021, 203). Undeterred by her love, though, Prakash “attacked Radha, the 
way a lion attacks its tamer” (Adiga 2021, 205). Notwithstanding these telling 
and already explicit hints, the animalization of both Prakash and Danny surfaces 
during their encounter at the pub. Firmly holding Danny’s wrist, the murderer 
refuses to let him go. While the TV screens in the pub show the evocative (and 
telling) images of greyhounds ready to start racing, Danny recounts the story of 
the bump in his forearm and the torture he was subjected to in Sri Lanka due 
to a misunderstanding at the airport. In postcolonial literature, storytelling is 
frequently seen as an act of metaphorical and symbolical survival, such as in By the 
Sea by Abdulrazak Gurnah (Steiner 2014, 113). In this case, though, storytelling 
literally enables Danny to survive by distracting Prakash’s attention and catching 
Costanza Mondo
48
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
him off balance. Exactly like the racing greyhounds, Danny rushes out of the pub 
after hitting Prakash with a small cactus.
As far as Prakash is concerned, animal imagery does not merely involve 
comparison or metaphors, but also an astonishing mesh-up. Wandering through 
Sydney with the awareness that Prakash has killed Radha, Danny suddenly 
sees a totem: “Topmost on the pole was a ferocious eagle with a yellow beak. A 
mop of silvery hair appeared on the eagle’s face, and black-rimmed spectacles 
now framed its giant hazelnut eyes” (Adiga 2021, 213). While The White Tiger 
brought to the fore opposed images such as man/animal (Gajarawala 2009, 22-
23), Amnesty relates a powerful example of partial metamorphosis. It is true that 
Radha is frequently compared to a bird, whereas a police officer is described as 
“whalishly blue” (Adiga 2021, 21) and Danny’s employer’s hands as “froggy-
white” (Adiga 2021, 175). However, the statue of the eagle with Prakash’s 
specific features goes one step further and involves assimilation and mixture of 
both human and animal traits. The fact that Prakash is not compared to a meek 
bird (like many which Danny sees while strolling around the city) but rather to 
an eagle further indicates his dangerousness and could put forward the eagle as 
a mirror of his true self. The peculiar ability of animals to make revelations and 
show what would otherwise go unnoticed will be further analysed later.
Since in this section I aimed to support the hypothesis that animal imagery 
points to the animalization of illegals in Australia, it could seem contradictory 
that Prakash and Radha are compared to animals, given their legal status. Yet, 
it should be remembered that the narration hinges upon Danny’s account and 
his perspective. While the Australian society chases him—an honest and willing 
worker—as if he were an unwelcome animal, Danny implicitly but effectively 
demonstrates that the real animals are two fully-fledged citizens, who are free to 
harm themselves and others. Rather than being flawless role-models, Radha and 
Prakash are both obsessed with gambling and involved in adultery. Having stolen 
large sums of money from her office to gamble, Radha even has a criminal record, 
while Prakash concisely recounts that he had a car accident while he was driving 
with a woman. Given that the woman’s father is angry at Prakash, it might be 
surmised that it was his fault.
Among the references to animals which contribute to strengthening the 
distressed situation of illegal immigrants, one could list an unusual artwork. 
Indeed, Danny twice comes across a mural depicting various animals trussed 
up and laid on a butcher’s table, in a sense reminiscent of the rooster coop in 
The White Tiger. Rather than mere roosters, though, in this case different animals 
are represented, exactly like the numerous nationalities of the immigrants whom 
Danny meets: “A deer with curved horns, a heron, and a rabbit. Three animals, 
three corpses, trussed up by wires from the ceiling of a kitchen, and below them, 
49
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
on the butcher’s table, a ram lay, its mouth bound with ropes, its tongue sticking 
out. The heron in profile had one eye open wide, as if to say: We didn’t even scream 
when the world was stolen from us” (Adiga 2021, 74; italics in the original). Aside 
from the pain experienced by the animals, this passage emphasizes the wires and 
ropes tying and paralyzing the creatures. With respect to this, Danny interestingly 
mentions a huge net falling from the sky of Sydney to envelop him and drag him 
into the blackness: “From high above Kings Cross, spreading and widening, Danny 
saw a dark net, […] spreading wide and falling faster, threatening to snare and 
drag him […] into blackness” (Adiga 2021, 186). The passage resonates with the 
ropes and wires that have mercilessly trapped the creatures in the mural. Indeed, 
the ties might be a reference to the Australian immigration policy, which not only 
deprives illegals of basic rights such as healthcare, but also condemns them to live 
in constant fear and voicelessness, which slowly but surely cripples them.
Back to the prevalent ornithic references, another interesting occurrence 
takes place during Danny and Sonja’s first date. Absolutely in the dark about 
Danny’s status as an illegal immigrant, Sonja asks Danny what prompted him 
to leave his country and its shimmering lagoon: “Now I’ll have to start lying, 
Danny thought, when the Parramatta River saved him: a white feather came 
floating along its surface, and he pointed it out to her. ‘That’s because they’ve 
privatized everything in Sydney,’ the vegan said” (Adiga 2021, 25). The feather 
flowing down the river could convey multi-faceted meanings. It could epitomize 
immigrants’ isolation in Australia, their precarious and frail condition in society 
or even the fact that they are at the mercy of events, lost in the torrential stream 
of the motivations which spurred them to seek shelter in other countries. Further 
testifying to the immigrants’ isolation, Sonja’s misunderstanding of Danny’s 
reference could exemplify the unbridgeable communication and comprehension 
gap between legals and illegals, the haves and the have-nots.
The image of the floating feather and Sonja’s answer can smoothly introduce 
another possible reason explaining the numerous ornithic references which 
may also accentuate the contrast between animals and immigrants. In several 
occurrences, birds are presented in flocks or in groups, like the black and white 
cockatoos, the jabirus, the pigeons, or the flock of unspecified birds which 
Danny sees while Sonja is driving. The fact that many of them are in groups 
highlights their tight community, whose members can rely on each other. On 
the contrary, illegal immigrants are utterly isolated and prevented from bonding 
by their very status of illegals. Purposefully unaware of each other’s lodgings, 
the immigrants whom Danny meets in front of the public library do not share 
personal details, should they be arrested and asked to report the others. In the 
afterword to Refugee Tales, Herd writes that in the UK detained immigrants are 
likewise hindered from forging communities, insomuch as they are frequently 
Costanza Mondo
50
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
relocated to other detention centres, which forcefully shatters and fragments their 
newly-formed ties (2019, 173). As Herd maintains: “The government’s word for 
this is ‘dispersal’ […] – a process which has the consequence of breaking up 
such communities as they might manage to form” (2019, 173). Rather than the 
detention policy, though, in Amnesty it is the very marginalization and chasing of 
immigrants that hampers their attempts at establishing tight bonds of friendship, 
in spite of their ostensible freedom. The relationship between illegal immigrants 
is fraught with suspicion and weakened by the scantness and fragmentary 
nature of their encounters. Although Danny is on good terms with an Indian 
legal immigrant, he informs readers that “That guy was legal, though. Friendship 
could only go so far” (Adiga 2021, 19; italics in the original).
The discrepancy between the solitude of the immigrant and the tight 
community of birds is further underlined by the beginning of the novel. When 
Danny steals a boat with a friend with the aim of finding the mermaids who 
supposedly inhabit the lagoon of Batticaloa, he is not scared—not even of his 
father’s anger which inevitably awaits him at home—because “He had a friend 
by his side” (Adiga 2021, 3). Meanwhile, “cormorants, red-breasted sea eagles, 
broad-winged pelicans circled over their heads” (Adiga 2021, 2), thereby possibly 
highlighting the harmony between the fear-dispersing bond between the two 
friends and the similarly-close-knit community of the flocks of birds. However, 
such harmony is pre-empted and shattered in Sydney.
3. Hacking One’s Way through the Jungle of Sydney
As previously highlighted, animal imagery focuses in particular on ornithic 
references, which pepper the narration and Danny’s meanderings through 
Sydney. However, references to other winged elements are not missing: airplanes 
are constantly landing or flying above the city in the plot. In the first part of the 
novel, Danny mentions an Emirates and a Qantas flight, while other occurrences 
include an unspecified plane, another plane which writes a marriage proposal in 
the sky and planes seen in the distance. Moreover, Danny’s first view of Sydney is 
framed by the window of the airplane he has taken in order to reach the country 
and Sonja’s much-yearned-for trip to Cairns involves taking an airplane, which is 
impossible for Danny, since he possesses no passport.
In my opinion, the references to birds and airplanes are tightly linked and 
might convey opposite meanings and associations of ideas. Freely soaring over 
Sydney’s sky, birds could represent liberty, in keeping with their traditional 
representation (an example from classical mythology is Daedalus’s decision to 
escape Minos’s labyrinth by shaping wax wings and flying away). This archetypical 
meaning could be evidenced by the following excerpt: “Up in the air, a seagull, 
51
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
catching a cross-building current, glided over the carnal entertainments of the 
Cross without moving a feather, only opening and closing its beak and emitting a 
series of loud squawks. […] Danny, assuming he was the subject of the seagull’s 
gossip, winced. He’s free, but that’s all he’s free for: gossiping up in the air” 
(Adiga 2021, 137). Almost mockingly, the seagull circling in the sky underlines 
Danny’s different condition of social outcast.
By the same token, airplanes do not convey the canonical idea of liberty, albeit 
winged and mimicking the unique ability of birds. In a way akin to birds, airplanes 
in the novel are shrouded in an aura of negativity, exemplified by numerous clues. 
Aside from the fact that Danny was tortured in an airport due to misunderstandings 
related to his flight, the airplane is the means through which he reached Australia, 
which undermines the credibility of his threatened existence in Batticaloa and 
therefore weakens his potential asylum request: “He had not come here on a boat: 
he had flown into Australia on Malaysia Airlines, economy-class ticket, and that 
was the problem” (Adiga 2021, 167; italics in the original). Rather than opening 
up the possibility to travel around the world without borders, airplanes remind 
Danny of his status of illegal immigrant and his curtailed freedom, as evidenced 
by the trip to Cairns which he keeps delaying and will never be able to do with 
Sonja. Paradoxically, the freedom to cross other countries’ borders is not denied 
to Prakash, a murderer who wishes to escape to South Africa by plane and would 
be absolutely unhindered, were his crime not revealed to the police.
The association between artificial means of transport like airplanes and 
animals like birds introduces another interesting correlation, namely the indirect 
comparison of Sydney to a jungle. Interestingly, such connection could justify 
the noticeable presence of birds in the novel. In fact, the city is frequently 
portrayed as a jungle, which acquires a profound meaning given that the Blue 
Mountains outside Sydney are ablaze because of widespread, raging wildfires. 
With its suburbs hemmed by “tropical plantains, begonia leaves […] and 
frangipani trees” (Adiga 2021, 8), Sydney is fraught with potential dangers for 
Danny, insomuch as with white people “all you have to do is start thinking […]. 
Like in a jungle, when you find a tiger in your path, how you’re supposed to 
hold your breath and stare back. They go away” (Adiga 2021, 4). Criss-crossed 
by zebra crossings, the roads become “the painted and tattooed war body of 
the hunter. Called the City of Sydney” (Adiga 2021, 34). Even without these 
explicit references, the city would still take on wild characteristics. Buttressing 
the vision of the city as a jungle, Danny is extremely reluctant to alter his routine 
and the streets he follows. There is a “black line” (Adiga 2021, 46) that he must 
not cross, but rather painstakingly toe. Indeed, infringing the black line would 
mean getting involved with Radha’s murder and having to hack his way through 
a city that is hostile to immigrants, thereby straying from the known, safe path to 
Costanza Mondo
52
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
penetrate a jungle. In a way, this is reminiscent of the episode of the Minotaur’s 
labyrinth and Arianna’s thread in classical mythology.
Far from being dark and gloomy, though, Sydney is described as imbued 
with light by Radha, who cannot resolve to leave the city because of its 
brightness, in spite of the attractive job offers she has received in other countries. 
However, readers should keep in mind that this is Radha’s viewpoint, namely 
the perspective of a citizen. Even if we admitted that Sydney is a city of light 
in Danny’s point of view as well, this would not make it less hostile to him, as 
Radha acknowledges: “But for you, […] this must be a terrible city, right? Some 
mornings, it must be. A prison of light” (Adiga 2021, 47; italics in the original). 
Indeed, light annihilates shadows where illegals seek shelter at the margins of 
society, carving themselves a niche to survive, albeit precarious. Upon exiting a 
pub, Danny says that he “vomited himself out of the door and into raw sunlight” 
(Adiga 2021, 109). In such a dazzling environment, everything is laid bare, 
exposed and inevitably brought into focus.
In this jungle of light, it comes as no surprise that “the blondest animal in 
Australia [is] […] their Rule of Law” (Adiga 2021, 111). Even in this field, animal 
imagery plays a key role. Rather than simple birds or other common animals, the 
creatures related to the law are magnificent, exceptional and typically Australian. 
Indeed, the Australian coat of arms features a kangaroo and an emu, while the 
judge in the courthouse sits “beneath a wooden pulpit mounted by a golden lion 
and a silver unicorn” (Adiga 2021, 219). As Cheuse points out, Adiga’s stories in 
Between the Assassinations remind readers of the “strange mixture of the strikingly 
beautiful and the filthy, which is the nature of every Indian village” (2009, 13). 
The same mingling can be found in Sydney as well, as Amnesty shows. As far as 
the magnificent animals representing Australia are concerned, it is as if Adiga 
parodied them by using the same or similar creatures in different contexts and 
seen from different perspectives, thus revealing the downsides of Australia’s 
ostensible flawlessness and adamantine perfection. As for the unicorn, there 
is a scene where Danny spots a curious creature in a street: “inside a wooden 
enclosure, tied to a post, a white goat, belly distended as if it were pregnant, a 
trapped unicorn, gazing back at him like the emblem of everything the West was 
meant to be” (Adiga 2021, 92; italics added). A clamorous reversal strikes the 
superb kangaroo as well, which maintains its form but is imbued with darker, 
sinister connotations in Prakash’s account: “this was in the Kimberleys, in 
the mining days. You’re out there at night, in a caravan or in a tent, and you 
hear them gnawing. They chew on bones all fucking night long, kangaroos” 
(Adiga 2021, 116-117). While the dejected condition of the goat is ripe with 
shortcomings, the voracious, bone-smashing kangaroos may evoke the hostile 
attitude of Australia towards illegals like Danny.
53
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
4. The Permanence of Animals and their Representational Power
Roaming around Sydney, Danny leads a phantom-like, evanescent and silent 
existence. The chasm between the insubstantiality of his life and the solidness of 
the birds’ ones could be another plausible motivation for the numerous animal 
encounters he experiences. After quoting Berger’s essay entitled “Why Look at 
Animals?,” Cohn states that “Animals, in other words, become figural, and as 
figures, their enchanting, spectacular difference is appropriated or effaced precisely 
where it would seem to be most marked” (2015, 573). In this case, though, it is 
illegals’ lives which disappear when compared to the animals which peacefully 
inhabit the Australian city. Lorikeets, cockatoos, jabirus, pigeons and many others 
glide past or swoop over the streets of Sydney with nobody inhibiting their stay 
in the city. Interestingly, the key to understanding the difference between the 
untroubled permanence of animals in Sydney and the precariousness of Danny’s 
existence in the city is offered by a passage concerned with the sea. While Danny 
is pondering the eventuality of informing the police about Radha’s murderer, he 
is addressed by the water: “Are you going back to your country so easily? the blue 
water asked the man. Whether it’s you or the white people here, it’s all the same to 
me, the water told the man. I’ll go on shining just like this” (Adiga 2021, 127; italics 
in the original). In this passage, the stress seems to be placed on the terms ‘man’ 
and ‘water,’ thus highlighting their inherent difference and different conditions. 
Enlarging the discourse, the water underlines the precariousness of every human 
being and the fixedness or unflappability of natural phenomena, if compared to 
humans’ insignificant rules or conflicts. Eventually, the water keeps shining, while 
Danny is arrested. In an interview, Adiga stated that Anglophone Indian fiction 
is too sentimental and that the “new dynamism and energy” of India ought to be 
reflected in its fiction (Derbyshire Interview 2001, 51). In line with this, Amnesty’s 
ending is abrupt, sudden and heart-rending in its blunt depiction of Danny’s silent 
arrest which is coldly and incidentally announced by the column of a newspaper.
Before concluding the analysis of the possible meanings of animal imagery, it 
should be pointed out that an important and interesting use of animal references 
pops up in pivotal scenes as if to mark their centrality and rippling consequences. 
At the beginning of his working day, Danny goes to the first house he has to 
clean, in which he finds a huntsman (a large but harmless Australian spider). 
Before killing it, Danny hears police officers going up the stairs of the building 
and is informed that a murder has been committed ‘across the street.’ Having 
killed the spider, he then goes to the window in order to dispose of the animal’s 
lifeless body. While performing this action, he sees a police van below and looks 
at the building in front of the flat, which is Radha’s house. It is at that moment 
that it dawns on Danny that the victim might be Radha, which he would have 
Costanza Mondo
54
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
never known or thought about, had he not killed the huntsman and gone to the 
window to throw it away. Indeed, the police officer told him that an incident 
had happened ‘across the road’ and not ‘behind the street,’ where the woman’s 
house is located: “There’s been a murder across the road. Not behind the street. So 
this, Danny told himself, can’t be the building—can’t. Just can’t” (Adiga 2021, 
29; italics in the original). His worst fears are confirmed, though, when he spots 
a red-eyed man showing the view to a police officer from the window of Radha’s 
house, which he immediately recognizes because of the red tulips on it.
In a sense, the killing of the spider triggers a sort of “explosion of consequences” 
(McEwan 2006, 19), to use an expression featured in McEwan’s Enduring Love. 
The spider opens up a new dimension for Danny and forces him to step outside of 
his safe, hidden zone, due to his pricking conscience. Even the golden highlights 
in his hair that were supposed to facilitate his integration and invisibility in Sydney 
cannot protect him anymore. Indeed, the young Sri Lankan realizes that “he could 
feel the comic weight of all those gold-tinted, shampooed strands of hair on his 
scalp. It was a huntsman sitting on his head and he was carrying it around Sydney. 
Go back at once, said his shame, to the storeroom in Glebe and wait” (Adiga 
2021, 47). Further touching on the relevance of the huntsman is the fact that 
the Australian spider features in the last conversation between Sonja and Danny. 
Unaware of Danny’s troubled day and of the fact that he has eventually called the 
police to prevent Prakash from committing a second murder, his girlfriend asks 
him: “‘Did you deal with that huntsman?’ […] ‘Oh, you shouldn’t have, you really 
shouldn’t’” (Adiga 2021, 249), with all the unwitting weight and implications 
of her words. As a result, the figure of the spider circularly binds together the 
beginning, the middle and the heart-breaking ending of the novel.
In addition, animals have the interesting ability to reveal the actual appearance 
of specific situations, acting as a sort of mirror which provides clarification. 
Radha and Prakash are used to going to a creek and, after having hired Danny as 
a cleaner, they start bringing him with them as a sort of jester. On one of these 
occasions, Danny recalls that he saw two children with a black dog at the creek. 
The excerpt is worth quoting at length due to its meaningfulness: “It was a black 
dog, and it was shivering, uncertain of the edge between land and water; and in 
the creek, two white boys, stripped to the waist, buoying up and down, laughed 
and mimicked the animal each time it howled, raising their heads to the sky and 
letting loose long doggy noises—which confused or enraged the black thing that 
staggered about the rocks, adding its weak protests to theirs” (Adiga 2021, 120). 
Read as a possible indirect representation of Prakash, Radha and Danny, the 
image is enlightening and revealing: the couple of gamblers frequently displays 
childish and reckless behaviour, thus pointing to the two children. On the other 
hand, Danny is brought with them as a dog could be, an entertaining animal 
55
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
which is not credited with the same status or agency as the two humans. If we 
add that Radha and Prakash are used to poking fun at Danny’s observations 
and questions, the mimicked (or rather aped) black dog further dovetails with 
the young Sri Lankan. As Radha bluntly and insensitively says: “‘Say something. 
Make us laugh. That’s why we bring you along and give you free food and drink, 
you know’” (Adiga 2021, 116). Furthermore, at the creek Radha muses: “‘we 
really should adopt this cleaner as our baby, shouldn’t we’” (Adiga 2021, 117). 
From child to dog the step is soon done. Further revelations triggered by the 
sight of animals include Danny’s realization of Prakash’s true intentions, which 
happens while Danny gazes at a school of bats: “A brown-red smear of blood was 
illuminated in the bat’s wing for just an instant, before it disappeared behind 
him. […] Danny could see now that Prakash was certainly not on his way to the 
airport” (Adiga 2021, 240; italics in the original).
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, the animal imagery scattered throughout Amnesty lends itself to 
numerous and compelling interpretations. It could epitomize the fearful condition 
of illegal immigrants, who can be reported by any Australian citizen who has 
suspicions about their status. Moreover, the clash between the community of birds 
and the isolation plaguing the immigrants is perfectly exemplified by the difference 
between various flocks of birds and Danny’s loneliness. Given that Sydney is 
portrayed as a jungle, the animal references might underline its wilderness, in 
spite of its evolution and cutting-edge technology. Not to mention the fact that 
animals can continue to dwell in Australia with no risk of being deported, thus 
showing a stability which is denied to immigrants like Danny, whose stay is 
transient and constantly threatened. In addition to the situation of immigrants and 
the description of the city, animal imagery plays an important role at the narrative 
level as well, by influencing pivotal scenes and acting as a revealing power which 
shows unexpected meanings or clarifies situations. In the light of all these thought-
provoking interpretations, Amnesty creatively displays a unique and multi-layered 
use of animal imagery, thereby also offering food for thought to readers.
Thanks to its rich variety of animal references and their varied interpretations, 
Amnesty can throw new insights into the field of analysis of Adiga’s other novels 
which display interesting animal metaphors. Indeed, multifarious meanings of 
animal references could be traced in the author’s literary production and enlarge 
the knowledge on recurring themes and literary characteristics of an important 
contemporary Indian writer. At a higher level, the analysis of Amnesty might offer 
an interesting contribution to the field of animal studies, since they recognize 
human evolution as a form of animality, albeit unique (Wolfe 2009, 572). Added 
Costanza Mondo
56
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
to this, the analysis of animal references in Amnesty could also be interesting to 
ecocriticism, which “questions the very categories of the human and of nature” 
(Westling 2014, 2). As a matter of fact, the novel employs several animal metaphors 
and, more importantly, applies them to contemporary times with a surprising 
variety of aims, which I have tried to bring to the foreground in this paper.
Works Cited
AdigA, Aravind. 2021. Amnesty. Kindle. London: Picador.
AdigA, Aravind. 2011. Last Man in Tower. Kindle. London: Atlantic Books.
AdigA, Aravind. 2009. The White Tiger. Croydon: Atlantic Books.
AnjAriA, Ulka. 2015. “Realist Hieroglyphics.” Modern Fiction Studies 61:114-137. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/mfs.2015.0005
Bertinetti, Paolo. 2010. English Literature. A Short History. Turin: Einaudi editore.
BlAke, William. 2017. Songs of Innocence and of Experience. Great Britain: Penguin 
Classics.
Cheuse, Alan. 2009. “Between the Assassinations by Aravind Adiga.” World Literature 
Today 83: 13. https://doi.org/10.1353/wlt.2009.0330
Cohn, Elisha. 2015. “Paperback Tigers: Breaking the Zoo.” Contemporary Literature 
56: 568-600. https://doi.org/10.3368/cl.56.4.568
ConCilio, Carmen, and Maria Festa, eds. 2016. Word and Image in Literature and the 
Visual Arts. Milan: Mimesis international.
derByshire, Jonathan. 2011. “The Books Interview: Aravind Adiga.” New Statesman 
140: 51. https://www.proquest.com/magazines/books-interview-aravind-adiga/
docview/878545453/se-2?accountid=14368.
gAjArAwAlA, Toral. 2009. “The Last and the First.” Economic and Political Weekly 44: 
21-23. https://www.jstor.org/stable/25663880.
herd, David. 2019. “Afterword.” In Refugee Tales (III) 2019, 170-180.
herd, David, and Anna Pincus, eds. 2019. Refugee Tales (III). Kindle. Great Britain: 
Comma Press. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429283970-13
hill, Amelia. 2017. “‘Hostile Environment’: The Hardline Home Office Policy Tearing 
Families Apart.” The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/
nov/28/hostile-environment-the-hardline-home-office-policy-tearing-families-
apart. [Accessed online on July 4 2022]
hughes, Ted. 1957. “The Jaguar.” Poeticous. https://www.poeticous.com/ted-hughes/
the-jaguar. [Accessed online on July 4, 2022]
iovino, Serenella. 2020. Ecologia letteraria. Milan: Edizioni ambiente.
khor, Lena. 2012. “Can the Subaltern Right Wrongs?: Human Rights and 
Development in Aravind Adiga’s “The White Tiger.”” South Central Review 29: 
41-67. https://doi.org/10.1353/scr.2012.0006
57
A Bird’s-Eye View over Sydney: Animal Imagery in Amnesty by Aravind Adiga
Alicante Journal of English Studies, Issue 38, 2023, pages 43-57
MCewAn, Ian. 2006. Enduring Love. Kindle. London: Vintage.
Mendes, Ana Cristina. 2010. “Exciting Tales of Exotic Dark India: Aravind Adiga’s 
The White Tiger.” Journal of Commonwealth Literature 45:275-293. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0021989410366896
PiCiuCCo, Pier Paolo. 2016. “The Use of Animal Imagery in Ted Hughes’s Animal 
Poems.” In Concilio and Festa 2016, 187–202.
steiner, Tina. 2014. Translated People, Translated Texts. Kindle Abingdon: Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315760223
wAlther, Sundhya. 2014. “Fables of the Tiger Economy.” Modern Fiction Studies 60: 
579-598. https://doi.org/10.1353/mfs.2014.0042
westling, Louise. 2014. “Introduction.” In Westling 2014, 1–13. https://doi.
org/10.1017/CCO9781139342728.001
westling, Louise, ed. 2014. The Cambridge Companion to Literature and the 
Environment. Kindle. New York: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1017/CCO9781139342728
wolfe, Cary. 2009. “Human, All Too Human: “Animal Studies” and the Humanities.” 
PMLA 124: 564-575. https://doi.org/10.1632/pmla.2009.124.2.564
